It's very generosity. Um, are you, are you,
you suing the Southern poverty law center? Is that what's going on?
Yeah. Uh, I in fact have an update for everybody cuz uh, you know,
we crowdfunded, uh,
a lot of the early costs for the case against the Southern poverty center.
What did they do? What is it? What is the, yeah, let me back up a please.
Um, uh, once upon a time, uh, yours truly a British Muslim,
uh, of Pakistani origin was listed in the United Kingdom on the
Thompson reuteers world check database under a category red terrorism
designation while at the same time being listed across the Atlantic
in the United States,
by the Southern poverty law center to as an anti-musli extremist.
So I was both a Muslim terrorist and an anti-musli extremist,
according to two separate lists.
And of course that speaks to some of the polarization in our times in how
irrational this conversation around extremism Islam integration Muslims in the
west has become, I sued Thom Reuter's world. The database,
this database is no joke. It's like HSBC and, and many,
many other banks use this database, uh,
for background checks on where clients can have a bank account with them.
So as a result of, for example, Thomson Reuters and their database, uh quum,
which is a counter extremism organization I founded 10 years ago had its bank
account shut down in the United States because of the Thom reute' world check
database system that HSBC subscribes to anyway, we sued them,
they paid damages, they issued an apology and they, uh, uh, uh,
took my name off this, uh,
terrorism designation list they have on their world check database, uh, Maja.
I think you, maybe you should back up further and just give the,
your kind of your sh short form bio in terms of why would you ever be on a
terroris sure watch list.
<Laugh> I'll I'll do that. Um, but at the same time,
the Southern poverty law center had, had listed me, as I said,
as an antimos extremist. So we are also, uh, taking legal action, uh,
against them. And, um, I, I will get to your point, but I think,
just wanna say that the I've just, uh, held a law firm on retainer,
Claire lock and they were the ones that sued the rolling stone magazine for that
college rape campus scandal. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Um, successfully got, uh,
won that case, Claire Locke, which is, uh,
an announcement made here exclusively with you. No one else knows this yet.
We have retained clairelocke, uh,
they are writing to the Southern poverty law center as we speak. Um,
I think they've got wind of it, the Southern poverty law center, as of,
I think either yesterday or the day before they've removed the entire list,
that's been up there for two years. I know they've removed the entire list,
which also had Aon herceali on it. Um,
and it's no longer available on their website.
Now, is there logic that if you are a critic of Islam,
of radical fundamentalist Islam,
that you are somehow or another or racist extremist that, so.
That's pretty much what they've said. If you criticize Islam, um,
AAN myself who have come from within the community yes.
Who have had that experience that somehow that makes us anti-Muslim, um,
there are a number of logical errors involved in that logical leap that they've
made. Do they have.
Any distinction? Is there,
is there anything that they write that sort of points to why they would say
that? Uh.
One of them, honestly, the reasons they listed, one of them was that I had a,
a bachelor party in a strip club a year before I got married.
That makes you an anti-musle extreme IST.
That was one of the reasons listed.
Why.
<Laugh> oh, the nine 11 hijackackers weren't a strip strip club on nine 10.
Right. So.
That was that, that real, they really listed that they.
Actually listed that,
which is part of the reason why we can prove malice because what has that gone
to do with anything that.
But that doesn't yeah, that doesn't make any sense. Yeah. So that was the,
that was a primary reason. It was one.
Of the three main reasons they origin listed. And another one was again false.
Uh, they claimed that I had called for the criminalization of the face veil for
Muslim women in the west, which wasn't true.
I had called for a policy to be adopted where in banks and airports,
where you are not allowed to wear a motorcycle helmet, I,
you also shouldn't be allowed to cover your, a face in the name of religion,
which is very different to calling for the criminalization per se of the face
fail.
That's like saying you're not allowed to wear a motorcycle helmet in a bank.
So I believe in the criminalization of motorcycle helmets, it's just absurd.
Yeah, it's ridiculous. Um, so it was a mischaracterization of my, um, opinion,
the article. So it's two. Yep. And the other one, uh, the, the, the,
the reason they, I can't even, because they kept changing their reasons,
the actual website has been, um, we've got the archive and, and it's been,
they've been changing it each time people have been pointing out the stupidity
of their allegations. Now, why.
Do they, what is the Southern poverty law center?
I mean, this is a painful irony because if you roll back the clock now,
you know, 20 or some odd years, the, their reasons to exist were great. I mean,
th this was the,
the flagship organization that was suing the KKK mm-hmm <affirmative> and,
you know, sovereign citizens and just the, the far right, you know,
white nationalist, Christian nationalist movements in the us, and in,
in some cases to great effect and their, and their concern,
obviously about, you know,
extremist hate groups in the us was totally valid. And I mean,
it was, it became, I mean, now, now that we see how morally confused they are,
people have been shining a light on them and they, and they've,
they're this bloated organization that's been taken in way too much money.
And they're, I mean, it's not, it, it suffers from other signs of,
of corruption or, or conflicts of interest. But back in the day,
you know, Morris D's was, you know,
bringing the KKK to court and bankrupting their various chapters and that all
that looked fantastic. And now the social justice warrior, moral panic,
uh, moral stupidity virus has gotten into their brains.
And they can't differe someone like mod from a
right wing Christian neo-Nazi hater of
Islam. Right. Or hater of, of, of, you know, people from the middle east. Uh,
and, and so it is with iion, herrsaiian,
I'm now the ironically you're off the website now I'm on it.
I think I'm on it in a, in a far more transitory way. But the, the,
the article that was written about my podcast with Charles Murray by V hit the
Southern property law center hate watch page. And so there,
you had articles about neo-Nazi groups, articles about the Austin Bond,
and then me and, and my podcast with Charles Murray.
I definitely want to talk about that. Yeah.
But I wanna give people your background first. Sure.
The reason why you were on the list in the UK in the first place had to do with
your actual background. Mmhmm <affirmative>.
So, so I was born and raised in Essex in the United Kingdom,
and I came of age in what I now I'll refer to as the bad old days of racism in
the United Kingdom, much has changed since then for the good, but in those days,
uh, there were, uh, serious, um, uh, uh, uh,
cases of violent racism that I faced, uh, hammer attacks,
machete attacks by actual Neo Nazis. I mean, I've grown up,
this is the irony of this Southern poverty law center listing.
I've grown up fighting Neo he's on the streets,
and they've been attacking me with hammers and machetes because of the color of
my skin. And youve got a bunch of white guys in Alabama, uh,
designating me in the same breath as they would designate,
designate these Neo Nazis,
but that when I grew up and having that experience being, um,
falsely arrested by Essex police on a number of occasions profiled while the
genocide in Bosnia was on unfolding against Muslims in Bosnia. Um,
I often say to an American audience, when I'm speaking about this,
we are now here with you on the west coast,
in this beautiful new studio you have. Congratulations. Thank you. Um,
and imagine a genocide was unfolding on the east coast against a,
a group of people with whom you identified,
and even if it's just on a human level human beings, but, you know,
even within in that a community identification would impact you in a way,
for example, if you defined yourself as, uh, Jewish,
and there was a genocide against Jews on the other side of this very continent
of this very country, how it would impact you on, on the west coast. Um,
well Sara, over Sara, Ava from London,
it takes us less time to fly from London to Bosnia than it does from York to LA.
And so it really had a profound impact on Muslims across Europe when that
genocide was unfolding and, and things were never the same. Again,
it radicalized an entire generation. Of course,
ideology had a lot to do with that,
but the anger originally came from the genocide. So at the age of 16,
what with, uh, the domestic racism and the, uh, situation in,
in Bosnia unfolding as it did, I joined, uh, hisboalard, which is a,
uh, uh, a non-terrorist still legal in America and in Britain and across Europe,
uh, Islamist organization,
it was the first of the global Islamist organizations that aspired to resurret
the notion of aaliphate, uh, which we've subsequently seen to, uh,
great damaging effect in the form of ISIS fate. Um, and, uh,
their method of coming to power was by infiltrating militaries in Muslim
majority countries, uh, recruiting army officers, and then instigating military,
cos whether that be in Turkey, in Pakistan, in Egypt,
these are the countries they, they targeted. Um,
and their aim would be to then through the military coup set up this caliphate,
which would then be an expansionist caliphate, uh, and would conquer the world.
I mean, that's, it sounds crazy. That's what they believe.
And that's what they're very, very serious and intent on bringing about.
And now people, when I say that, believe me,
cuz they've seen the ISIS experiment unfold,
but I joined a group that sought to do that. Um,
through non- terroristic means at the age of 16, I ended,
ended up on the leadership of that organization in the UK, uh,
ended up co-founding that group in Pakistan in 1999 where I went, I left the UK,
went to Pakistan, um, was among the first,
the Vanguard of British Pakistani members that,
and out there to set the group up, uh, they've been about three or four, uh,
C Plotts in Pakistan,
since an army officers have been arrested for being members of this group.
And many of them still in jail. Um, I spent a year in Pakistan, went back, um,
while studying for my degree in the university of London, uh, would fly Monday,
uh, would fly on Saturdays and Sundays to Copenhagen in Denmark.
I co-founded the Danish Pakistani chapter of this group.
And then the third year of my degree, cause I was doing law in Arabic, um, uh,
resulted in me having to go to an Arab country for the language year.
And so I chose Egypt and, uh, a day before the nine 11 attacks in 2001,
I ended up in Egypt.
I went to Alexandria enrolled in the university of Alexandria to study for the
year of, uh, Arabic language, which was the third year of my degree. Um,
of course nine 11 happened and the climate changed,
the security climate changed all over the world.
Something we didn't know about nor predicted. And on the first of, uh,
um, April, 2002,
my house in Alexandria was raided by the Egyptian states of security.
I was blindfolded, my hands were tied behind my back.
I was then driven through the desert into Cairo to the dungeon of the state
security headquarters, um, in a building known as, uh, as, uh aljiaz,
which is the main headquarters of Amina dollar, the internal state security.
Uh, we were held in the Dungeons there for four days and they electrocuted, um,
most of the prisoners that they had there, um, tortured them, interrogated them.
On the fourth day, I was taken to a, a prison known as Mazara,
uh, in Cairo, um,
put into solitary confinement for about three and a half months,
then charged eventually sentenced to five years as a political prisoner under
the egyptianed agency law, um, and served my full sentence there in Egypt,
uh, eventually left prison in 2006 in returned to the UK. So.
So did, did amnesine international get you out at.
All or, or they just, no, they only took an interest in you, you were coming.
So they can'tcampaign for my release and nobody got me out cause that had to
finish my full prison sentence. Right. Um, but at what changed me and,
and led to me to be the man that sits before you today is you're right, Sam,
uh, Amnesty's uh, adoption of me and, and,
and a few others in the case as prisoners of conscience.
And they took the very brave and bold step. Now looking back at it,
because keep in mind the context there.
This is Bush was president Tony Blair was prime minister and we were in the
thick of the war and terror.
We were in the middle of it and am amnesy comes along and says,
we disagree with everything this guy stands for,
but they don't believe in using violence to bring their caliphate about.
And so we will defend their rights to say stupid things and they shouldn't be in
prison. They certainly shouldn't have been tortured for it. So, um,
amnesty adopted us as prisoners of conscience and I was 24 years old at the
time, by the way. So everything I've just described,
you happened to me up until the age of 24 when I was in prisoned.
And it was the first time in my relatively young life. I'm 14 now. Right.
And, uh,
I had never been defended by any main stream pillar of mainstream society
in that way before nobody had spoken out for me. And that had a,
a real huge kind of emotional impact on my psyche. Um,
I've said in my, um, autobiography that where the heart leads,
the mind can follow.
And so I was now willing to consider alternatives because of Amnesty's work
campaigning for me. And so I spent the next four years in prison, uh, reading,
uh, rereading all well. Uh, every one of his, uh, books, reading token, reading,
classic English, literature, studying Islamic theology,
really trying to understand the world around me. Um,
and I had four years to do so.
And I spent four years debating and discussing with, um,
pretty much the founders of edits,
main jihadist organizations who were in jail with me in this same prison,
including the assassins or the former president,
an Sadat who had been killed in 1981 because of his peace deal with Israel and
his assassins were in jail with me and they'd been in prison longer than I'd
been alive.
And so they had some collective years of wisdom between them and most of those
jihadist prisoners, I was in jail with had over the course of those years,
two decades and more changed their views and reformed.
There were still conservative religious Muslims, something, which I'm not. Um,
and I never, I don't claim to be in my, in my work at the moment. Um,
but they were still religious Muslims, but they were no longer, um, extremists.
And they were no longer what I call Islamists people that sought to implement
their version of Islam over society. And so they, uh,
in four years of constant debate and discussion with them, um,
people that I knew had more wisdom than me they've been in jail for longer than
I've been alive. Um, I, my views began slowly changing.
I read a lot of the books they wrote about changing their own views and why they
changed. And, uh, upon my release, uh, I, I, I,
a good few months after my release, I,
I had to leave the organization cause I no longer believed in an ideology that I
was once.
Prepared to die for. That is fascinating that the shift came about in jail,
speaking with assassins.
Among many others.
Yeah. That, I mean, that is really incredible.
You would think that most people think that when someone goes to jail,
usually whatever criminality that they have in them is cemented in hardened.
Yeah. I'm I,
I don't know why mine is an exceptional case cuz most people you're right.
Whether you look at sad, kuup,
who's known as the founding father of modern dejihadism.
He started off like me a non-terrorist Islamist, but in Egypt, jails, in fact,
the very jail I was held in,
he was tortured and he ended up becoming the godfather of modern day terrorism,
um, through his book milestones or my in, in Arabic.
And yet that in my case, for whatever reason, you know, it,
I kind of went that bit further to question everything I believe in. Um,
but that's not normal Mo in most cases, when you torture people in jail, it,
it ends up hardening and osifying that ideology and people become as angry
as you know, they become the monster that they were seeking to defeat.
So you get outta jail. What do you do then? So.
I, I, uh, left the group in 2007 and by 2008 in January. So I finished degree.
I had one year left of my undergraduate degree. I, I graduated,
I did my masters at the London school of economics in political theory.
And while doing the masters set up Quium and Quium, uh, we,
we bill as the world's first counter extremism organization, it was meant to be,
uh, we believe it is bringing us back to the SLC's allegation,
a Muslim response to extremism from people that have lived it and been through
it. Um, my co-founders were Islamists themselves who changed like me, uh,
Muslims born and raised, uh,
come from the community to have a community based response,
a Muslim response to this growing problem of extremism.
And this was 10 years ago and course ISIS emerged since then a only
demonstrating why this kind of response was needed.
And so for the Southern poverty law center to designate somebody with my
background, with that trajectory,
with somebody who was prepared to die for this cause, um, a a,
and so somebody who wanted to address these problems as a Muslim,
uh, to call for reform for the good of my communities,
as opposed to against them, you know, at the end of the day,
it can only benefit Muslim communities. If extremism is put back in its box, um,
for them to then list someone like me as an anti- Muslim Extrem, it,
it just really does. I think,
shine a light on the true absurdity of the situation we find ourselves in, uh.
Absurdity and the,
the lack of real investigation or backing up
their claims with actual facts yeah. And information.
And that brings me to your story with Charles Murray and VX and Ezra Klein.
Well's.
Linger here for a moment. Sure. It's the same problem,
but not only is it a lack of investigation, but when it gets pointed out,
I mean, I forgot the, the guy's name of the S SPLC who was quarterbacking this,
but it wasn't more as D's, but it was someone high up at mark it potik or the.
The CEO, uh, something Cohen, I think is that.
Uh, I thought it was mark pot. Anyways, he's listed in the,
he's named in the Atlantic article at first, put this on our radar, but he,
they just double down. I mean, the,
the error cannot be pointed out clearly enough to trigger. I mean,
much less an apology, a any modulation of, of the claim. They just,
people just double down in the face of obvious counter evidence. And that's,
it's, it's just not about a sincere engagement with the problem. And there's,
and there's this, there's so many variables here that make it,
make it a really toxic environment. But one is that the, the,
the locus of concern is never the individual. It is the group,
it's the tribe. And so you can, it's like,
they'll sacrifice any number of individuals to make the political
case they want to make. Uh, so they, they don't, they're completely,
unreented when they're shown to get it wrong. And so, and,
and in your case and an Ion's case, it's just such a,
such a grievous moral lapse,
because not only is it is the attack on you illegitimate,
it actually raises yours, your security concerns mm-hmm <affirmative> and it,
it, it, it becomes a, a reference point for journalists who are confused,
who can't follow the plot, or don't have the time to, to fact check everything.
It makes you radio actor from the point of view of mainstream journalists,